The executives and CXOs are not just letting everyone run
wild to get the themes implemented.
Since themes are not only the lifeblood of a company,
they are, in essence, the company, so the proper oversight is required.
Portfolio management.
Portfolios are important for the same reason business
unit or programs are important,
but on steroids since they apply to the entire enterprise.
Portfolios exists in order to focus enterprise resources that will
enable broader business benefits and objectives.
Portfolios have a broader reach, business impact,
and benefits than a program does.
The portfolio requirements activities have a total impact,
positive or negative, on all projects and operations within the enterprise.
The construct of portfolio management was created to manage the effective
use of resources in order to achieve the company's vision.
The term portfolio, or portfolio management,
may be called something else in other companies,
but all well‑run large enterprises have a process to do this,
all of them.
Portfolio management.
So who is making all these decisions about what are the best
themes and how and when to invest in them?
That would be the portfolio management team,
which would be comprised of maybe the board of directors,
executives, you know, the CXOs, line of business leaders,
LOBs, and other key individuals.
The focus of portfolio management is typically investment oriented.
That is, where should we, as a company, invest our money?
Such as, develop new products or services,
improve existing products or services, future research and development,
add, reduce, or remove investments even.
These phrases may, in fact, be themes in and of themselves,
but these are a little bit lofty,
and they are usually a little more to the point.
Here are the mechanics behind portfolio management.
Portfolio management decides on what is to be worked on and the rationale why.
Usually senior product managers and analysts heavily contribute to the why.
They establish themes, technical and business,
and I will talk more about technical themes in the next section.
They prioritize themes and epics,
and here is where analysts help gather the necessary information to guide the
prioritization of the translation of themes into epics.
And lastly,
portfolio management authorizes budgets and other fiduciary oversight as to
the progress of implementing the themes through epics.
Here is an example of a simple workflow of portfolio management.
You could use this as a starting point and then modify it to meet your needs.
First,
you identify and gather the executives you need to
form your executive steering group.
They should be members of the C‑suite, so like CEO, CFO, COO, etc.
Plus, you'll want to have the CIO and the CTO as members as well.
And, of course, anyone else that makes sense to join.
From that team,
you identify and itemize key strategic themes with corresponding data,
such as business cases, outcomes, goals,
targets, ROI, etc.
Then your PMO executive team, maybe the same players or a subset,
will follow the portfolio management governance
defined and review the themes and epics,
the results of which is the epics backlog.
Portfolio management reviews the backlog,
adds new items,
and discusses feedback from ongoing epics and their associated projects.
If a new epic is approved,
the team will make a resource allocation and launch a new epic.
Or maybe we adjust the resource allocation for an
existing epic or project either up or down.
Next is an example of a portfolio of epics for theme X,
which is a container of epics.
There would be a container for each theme as a way to display progress to the
executives or governance body for easy status reporting.
As you can see in this example, we have four epics in theme X.
Two are ongoing and doing pretty well as green,
one is red, so that might be an issue that we may need to drill in on,
and Epic 4 is yellow.
We still want to drill in, but maybe there is hope for that project.
Their portfolio, project, or program managers will be feeding information in,
that is a decision metric such as value,
cost, risks, and things like that,
all back into the portfolio management reviews to enable
quality decision making as you move forward.
So this is rather simplistic,
but I want you to get the general idea about portfolio governance, which is the responsibility of portfolio management.